## Flexible box Layout

When the pages moves from table-based layouts to pure css, the people need to use complex calculations and complex structures in pure css, the flexible box layout eliminate the need of complex calculations letting the elements resize to fit the space they have, this layout is not suitable for every page and is better to use in interfaces.

### Declaring the Flexible Box Model

The first step is to create the flex container, the parent element that creates a new formatting context for its contents, to do this you simply use:

```
E { display: flex; }
```

This create a block-level container, you can use the alternative inline-flex, to have a inline-level.

Any item in the flex container is a flex item, this item is subject of any formating in the parent container.

The layout is defined by the language declare in the header section.

To alter the layout direction, you can use the flex-direction property container you use the flex-direction property.

```
E {
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: column;
}
```

### Flexbox Alignmet

The flexbox alignment use two axis the main and the cross axis, the directions of this changes in the row or column, you can see it in this [image](src/image1.png).

You can reverse the order in which the axis goes, so you can use start and end as relative directions.

### Reversing the Content Order

In order to change the order un witch the content display you modify the flex-direction property like this:

```
E { flex-direction: row-reverse; }
```

### Fully Reordering Content

You can modify the order patterns with the order property, the values of this property are ordinal numbers, any items without a declared numbers come first, because the default is 0

### Adding Flexibility

When usign flexbox you will encounter moments were the total lenght of the flex items is diferent of the lenght of the  container, in this moments we cand modify how the items will act.

#### The flex-grow Property

If you have three elements that combined width is 450px and a container of 600px, an empty space of 150px is present, you can use the flex-grow property to make the items grow.

```
.flex-item { flex-grow: 1; }
```

In this case the 1 represent the ratio in witch the items grew, in this case is 1:1:1 but if we use 3 it will be 1:3:1, so in this case the one in the center is the bigest.


#### The flex-shrink Property

This property act the reverse way of the previous one, when the items are bigger than the container, this makes the items shrink in the ratio provided.

```
.flex-items { flex-shrink: 1; }
```

in this case the elements shrink as the same rate but if we use 3 the one item will be shrink three times more, son in this case it will be the smallest.

#### The flex-basis Property

The width of the flex items can be set by the content the contain or by an explicit width value, and any growth or shrinkage is calculated from that base width. To change how the width adjustment is calculated, you can set a flex-basis value on an element. This property is length unit.

```
.flex-item { flex-basis: 100px; }
```

flex-basis is over any other width value, and this value is used to calculate the adjustment.

#### The flex Shorthand 

The order is: flex-grow, flex-shrink, and flex-basis.

```
E { flex: 1 2 150px; }
```

### Alignment Inside the Container

When you have items with fixed dimension inside a flex container, most likely you will have empty spaces, in this cases you can align the items to make better use of the space.

#### Horizontal Alignment with justify-content

This property is applied to the flex container and accept a series of keywords used depending on the directions of the flex parent.

```
.flex-container { justify-content: keyword; }
```

flex-start is the default value, that align the elements at the start of the direction, flex-end distributes the elements at the end of the direction, center distributes all the elements in the center of the container, space-between adds equal amounts of space between each element and none in the begining and the end, space-around that puts equal amount of space an both side of each element.

#### Vertical Alignment with align-items

When the height of the element is smaller than the cointainer, some blank space remains, so you can make better use of this space.

```
.flex-container { align-items: keyword; }
```

stretch makes the items the same size height as the parent, flex-start that align the items at the start of the axis direction, flex-end that align the items at the end of the axis direction, center that align the items in the center of the vertical axis.

#### Cross-Axis Alignment with align-self

This property applies to the item not the container, so the sibling elements are unafected, and has the same keywords as align-items.

#### Wrap and Flow

When you have to many items in a single row of a container you can break it into multiple lines by using the flex-wrap property, this property have two keywords, wrap and nowrap, the default is nowrap, and wrap activate the property, breaking the lines below the previous one.

```
.flex-container { flex-wrap: wrap; }
```

#### The flex-flow Shorthand 

The order is the next: flex-wrap, flex-direction.

```
E { flex-flow: column wrap-reverse; }
```

#### Aligning Multiple Lines with align-content

When items align in lines you can control the alignment with the align content property, it has the same property as align-items, but also adds stretch, wich resize the items to fill all unused space.

### Browser Support and Legacy syntaxes

In IE10 you had to use -m- before the properties, and some of this changes, if you need to give support to IE10, you can read the oficial documentation if you need help.

|                      | Chrome | Firefox | Safari |   IE |
| -------------------- | ------ | ------- | ------ | ---- |
| Flexible box layout  |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |


## [Prev](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/Chapter14/Ch14.md)
## [Index](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/index.md)
## [Next](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/Chapter16/Ch16.md)