## Color and Opacity

In CSS2, the color was based on the RGB color scheme, but this can cause some problems in finding specific shades of colors you need. Thankfully, in CSS3, some changes have occurred, such as opacity and a new color module.

### Opacity property

In the real world, opacity is the property of a material that measures the amount of light that passes through it. In CSS, opacity refers to how much of the background can be seen through an object. It is represented by a numeric value and its syntax is.

```
E { opacity: number;}
```

This value is a decimal fraction, which means the maximum value is 1. At this value, the object is fully opaque. An important fact to note is that the opacity is inherited by all the children of the modified element.

### New and Extended Color Values

In CSS2.1, there were three ways of specifying colors: keywords, hexadecimal codes, and rgb. In CSS3, these options expanded to include the alpha channel.

#### Alpha Channel

Alpha is the measure of opacity of a color, different from the opacity of an element. Alpha does not modify the overall opacity, but rather modifies the old RGB to a new RGBA.

```
E { color: rgba(red, green, blue, alpha); }
```

This value function as the opacity of element, the maximun value is 1.

##### RGBA and Graceful Degradation 

Older browsers that don't support Alpha will ignore any rule with this property. So, in order to save the color, you need to specify the color before without alpha. This applies to the new properties added to colors.

#### Hue, Saturation, Lightness

Often referred to as HSL, this new system functions like a 3D [cylinder](Resources/HSL.png). In this cylinder, the angle represents the hue, the distance to the axis represents saturation, and the distance along the cylinder represents lightness.

Hue represents all the major colors, beginning and ending with red at 0 and 360, in the order of the rainbow colors or the visible spectrum. The value is an angle between 0 and 360.

Saturation is the strength or intensity of that color: 0% represents zero intensity, while 100% represents full intensity.

Lightness is the measure of brightness, where 0 represents black, 50 represents the true color, and 100 represents white.

Here is a table of common equivalents

|  HSL          |  RGB        | Hexadecimal | Keyword |
| ------------- | ----------- | ----------- | ------- |
| 0,0%,0%       | 0,0,0       | #000000     | black   |
| 360,0%,100%   | 255,255,255 | #FFFFFF     | white   |
| 0,100%,50%    | 255,0,0     | #FF0000     | red     |
| 120,100%,25%  | 0,128,0     | #008000     | green   |
| 240,100%,50%  | 0,0,255     | #0000FF     | blue    |

#### HSLA

There is also valid to use Alpha in HSL, known as HSLA, the syntax as well as RGBA, use the value of alpha at the end, the syntax is.

```
E { color: hsl(hue,saturation,lightness,alpha); }
```

#### The Color Variable: currentColor

This keyword function inherits the color of one element to another without writing the code again.

an example is.

html
```
<h2>The Central Intelligence Agency (<abbr>CIA</abbr>).</h2>
<h2 class="ccolor">The Federal Bureau of Investigation (<abbr>FBI</abbr>)</h2>
```

CSS
```
h2 {
    color:black;
}
.ccolor {
    background-color: black;
    color: white;
}
h2 abbr {
    border-bottom: 6px double currentColor;
}
```
 This example es seen like this [image](Resources/currentcolor.png)

|                     | Chrome | Firefox | Safari |   IE |
| ------------------- | ------ | ------- | ------ | ---- |
| opacity             |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| RGBA values         |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| HSL values          |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| HSLA values         |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| currentColor value  |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |



## [Prev](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter09/Ch9.md)
## [Index](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter10/README.md)
## [Next](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter11/Ch11md)