## Transition and Animations

Web pages are often divided into three layers: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, and these layers should be kept separate. However, CSS has some behavioral aspects, so let's discuss that.

### Transitions

Previously in CSS2.1, there were no in-between states in property changes. For example, when using hover, the change is abrupt. In CSS3, we have transitions, which help to make the changes smooth. In order for a transition to occur, four conditions should be met: the initial value, the end value, the transition, and the trigger. Here is an example.

```
div {
    background-color: black;
    transition: background-color 2s;
}
div:hover { background-color: silver; }
```

In this example, the initial value is background-color: black, the transition is background-color 2s, the trigger is hover, and the final state is background-color: silver.

#### transition-property

This property specify which property or properties gets animated, the syntax is the following.

```
E { transition-property: keyword; }
```

The keyword is one of three option, none, all and a property valid i CSS3, like font-size.

#### transition-duration

This property specify the time the transition takes to complete, the syntax is the following.

```
E { transition-duration: time; }
```

The units of time are ms (milliseconds) and s (seconds). This property is the only necessary condition for a transition to occur, as the default value is 0.

#### transition-timing-funtion

This property helps you modify the variation of speed along the transition, giving you control of the pace.

##### Timing Function Keywords

To use a keyword with this property you use the next syntax.

```
E { transition-timing-function: keyword; }
```

The possible keyword values are: ease, linear, ease-in, ease-out, and ease-in-out. Ease (default value) starts slowly, accelerates quickly, and slows down in the end. Linear progresses steadily along the transition. Ease-in starts slowly and accelerates towards the end. Ease-out starts quickly and slows down towards the end. Ease-in-out starts slowly, accelerates, and slows down in the end, similar to ease but less dramatic.

##### The Cubic Bézier Curve

This property allows you to have a more precise  control in the animation timing, before the explanation, this is the syntax.

```
E { transition-timing-function: cubic-bezier(x1, y1, x2, y2); }
```

By definition a cubic Bézier curve, is a smooth, continuous curve that passes through four important points plotted on a grid that goues from 0 to 1 in both axes, the points are P0(0,0), P1(x1,y1), P2(x2,y2) and P3(1,1) like in this [ilustration](Resources/Resource1.png).

You need to remeber that you dont have to declare P0 and P3 because this values are static, an example to see this, is viewing the keyword with their values in a Bézier curve.

| Keyword Value | Cubic Bézier Values |
| ------------- | ------------------- |
| ease          | 0.25, 0.1, 0.25, 1  |
| linear        | 0, 0, 1, 1          |
| ease-in       | 0.42, 0, 1, 1       |
| ease-out      | 0, 0, 0.58, 1       |
| ease-in-out   | 0.42, 0, 0.58, 1    |

To see these examples in a graphical way, you can use http://cubic-bezier.com/. On this website, you can manually modify the curve to see how it varies.

##### The steps() Function

An alternative to a smooth change is to use steps() funtion, which runs the animation in a series of staggered intervals, the syntax is the following.

```
E { transition-timing-function: steps(count, direction); }
```

The count value is an integer that states hoe many intervals the animation should rin througth, and optional duration is one of two keywords, start or end, (default) that sets the point which the change happens in each interval.

Let see an example, using the next code.

``` 
E { transition-timing-function: steps(4 start); }
E { transition-timing-function: steps(4 end); }
```

Vizualized in a similar grid to the previous funtion, we can see that instead of being a continuous line, steps are more like snapshots of the animation in action, the direction keyword select when the change of step occur, in the default end the change happens at the end of the step (pause, then change), and the alternative start means the change happens at the start of the step (change, then pause) you can see it better in this [ilustration](Resources/Resource2.png).

#### transition-delay

The final property in the transition-* family is transition-delay, which sets the time when the transition starts, the syntx is the following.

```
E { transition-delay: time; }
```

The units are in ms (miliseconds) and in s (seconds) the default value is 0 which start as soon as is trigger, and you can use negative numbers, this make your animation to start as soon as posible and to skip the amount of negative time in the animation.

#### The transition Shorthand Property

To write less code and reduce the space ocupped we can use the next Shorthand

```
E { transition: property duration timing-function delay; }
```

so instead of writting this.

```
h1 {
    transition-property: font-size;
    transition-duration: 2s;
    transition-timing-function: ease-out;
    transition-delay: 250ms;
}
```

you can write

```
h1 { transition: font-size 2s ease-out 250ms; }
```

#### Multiple Transitions

You can add multiple transition to an element using a list of comma-separated values to the individual or shorthand properties.

```
E {
    transition-property: border-width, height, padding;
    transition-duration: 4s, 500ms, 4s;
}
E { transition: boerder-width 4s, height 500ms, padding 4s; }
```

If you have two properties with the same duration, can only declare two values in duration, and this will be looped until all the properties have a durations, so in this case you can rewrite the code like this.

```
E {
    transition-property: border-width, height, padding;
    transition-duration: 4s, 500ms;
}
```

### Animations

Transition are good, but are limited, they are only applied when a property value changes, instead the animations can be applied directly into an alement with a more flexible syntax, but the process to create an animation is diferent, first you define the properties and timming, and then you add the animation controls to the elements that will be animated.

#### Keyframes

You can view CSS animation as a sequence of transitions. The first step in creating your own animation is to define your keyframes, which are the points that set the start and end of a transition. The most simple animation has two keyframes: one at the beginning and one at the end. The more complex the animation is, the more keyframes there are. The syntax is as follows.

```
@keyframes name {
    selector { property: value; }
}
```

The first value is the name. This is whatever name you want to use in your animation. As a suggestion, use a short and descriptive name to easily follow up on your markup. The next value is the selector, which sets the position along the duration of the animation that the keyframe will occur. A usual value is a percentage, or you can use one of two keywords - from or to - which are 0% and 100%. In each selector, there is a CSS declaration or a series of declarations that are applied to a selected element at the specified stage of time.

You dont have to put the events in order, the browser will display them correctly as written, and in case of superposition the code will follow the cascade rules, which means the last declared have preference.

#### animation-name

The animation-name property refers to an animation that's been defined with @keyframes rule, and the syntax is pretty simple.

```
E { animation-name: name; }
```

This property call an previous created animation to use in a element, the default is none that prevent any animation from occuring on this element.

#### animation-duration

The duration of an animation is set by the animation-duration property, wich syntax is.

```
E { animation-duration: time; }
```

time is a numeric value with units of ms or s, the default value is 0 that prevent the animation from running, negative values do the same as 0.

#### animation-timing-function

This property is exactly the same as in transition, so if you need help you can see [transition-timing-function](#transition-timing-funtion).

#### animation-delay

As well as the previous property this one is the same to its transition counterpart, so if you have doubts you can check [transition-delay](#transition-delay).

#### animation-iteration-count

Unlike a transition, which only happens once, an animation can be repeated any number of times. The number of repetitions is set by the animation-iteration-count property, which has this syntax.

```
E { animation-iteration-count: count; }
```

The count values in this syntax is either a whole number or the keyword infinite, the default value is 0, the negatives numbers act as 0.

#### animation-direction

You can alter the animation to play in reverse, you can do this with the syntax.

```
E { animation-direction: keyword; }
```

The keyword has two possible options: normal or alternate. The default is normal, which makes the animation play forward. On the other hand, alternate makes the animation go normal and then in reverse before starting again. This means that odd repetitions go forward and pairs go in reverse.

#### animation-fill-mode

if your element animation is finite, you use the animation-fill-mode property to set how the element would display outside the animation cycle, to ejemplify have in mind this style rules.

```
@keyframes example {
    from { background-color: red; }
    to { background-color: blue; }
}
E { 
    animation-delay: 1s;
    animation-duration: 1s;
    animation-iteration-count: 2;
    animation-name: example;
    background-color: green;
}
```

in this case the element is green for 1 second and the change to red and 2 seconds later to blue, repeat two times and the go back to green, you can change this with the syntax.

```
E { animation-fill-mode: keyword; }
```

The permitted keywords are: none (default), backwards (the declaration specified in the 0% keyframe will be applied to the element before the animation begins), forwards (the declarations in the 100% keyframe will be applied when the animation ends), and both (the 0% declaration will apply before the animation and the 100% declaration will apply after). In our case, using both will make the element red, then blue, and it will stay blue after the animation, so the green will never show.

#### animation-play-state

This property sets whether an animation is active, the syntax is the following.

```
E { animation-play-state: keyword; }
```

The keyword have two posible values, running (the animation is playing) and paused (the animation isn't playing) you can use this to make a play/pause action

```
E:hover { animation-play-state: paused; }
```

In this example, the animation is paused when you hover your mouse over the element.

#### The animation Shorthand

You can take advantage of the Shorthands to write less, the syntax is.

```
E { animation: name duration timing-function delay iteration-count direction fill-mode play-state; }
```

so having the next code.

```
div {
    animation-name: expand;
    animation- duration: 6s;
    animation-timing-function: ease-in;
    animation-delay: 2s;
    animation-iteration-count: 10;
    animation-direction: alternate;
    animation-fill-mode: forwards;
    animation-play-state: running;
}
```

With the shorthand

```
div { animation: expand 6s ease-in 2s 10 alternate both running; }
```

#### Multiple animations

You can add multiple animations to an element using a comma-separeted list using or not the shorthand, like this.

```
E {
    animation-name: first-anim, second-anim;
    animation-duration: 6s, 1.25ms;
    animation-delay: 0, 750ms;
}
E { animation: first-anim 6s, second-anim 1.25ms 750ms; }
```

|                | Chrome | Firefox | Safari |   IE |
| -------------- | ------ | ------- | ------ | ---- |
| Transitions    |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |
| Animations     |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |


## [Prev](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter11/Ch11.md)
## [Index](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter14/README.md)
## [Next](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter15/Ch15md)