## Gradients

The gradient is a subtle transition between two colors. In the story of CSS3, this is achieved through various methods, but eventually, a syntax was agreed upon.

### Linear Gradients

A linear gradient is the simplest way to create a gradient; it creates a color change between two points in a straight line proportionally the syntax is.

```
E { background-image: linear-gradient(black, white); }
```

#### Setting Gradient Direction

The axis between the first and the last color-stops is known as the gradient line, the default is from top to bottom, the syntax is.

```
E { background-image: linear-gradient(to first second, black, white); }
```

were first and second referes to the direction in which the axis point, in case of using two it creates an diagonal line, you can also use a degree value in the form of "##deg".

#### Adding Extra Color-Stops

You can add more than two colors in the gradient, to do this you only need to add it in the list, like this syntax.

```
E { backgroung-image: linear-gradient(black,white,black); }
```

##### Angle units

There are four angle systems. These are: the degree system, where a full circle is 360 degrees; the gradians system, where a full circle is 400 gradians; the radians system, where a full circle is 2π radians; and the turn system, where a full circle is 1 turn.

##### Color-Stops

By default, the color-stops are evenly distributed along the length of the gradient. However, you can modify this by adding a numeric value next to the color. This value can be a percentage or a linear unit.

#### Repeating Linear Gradients

You can made a reapiting gradient along the element, to do this you use this syntax.

```
E { background-image: repeating-linear-gradient(white, black 25%); }
```

in the syntax, the value at the end of the colors represent at what point of the element the gradient end and repeat.

### Radial Gradients

The radial gradient creates a gradual transition between two colors, emanating from a central point and extending in all directions along a circle or an ellipse, the syntax is.

```
E { background-image: radial-gradient(white, black); }
```

#### Using Radial Gradients

The default pattern is an ellipse. You can change this by adding the word "circle" at the beginning of the argument. You can also add a numeric value next to this keyword, preceded by the word "at", to modify the position of the center. If you don't use the word "at", these numeric values will modify the point where the gradient ends. The four possible keywords to modify the extent are "farthest-corner" (default), "closest-corner", "closest-side", and "farthest-side", here is an example.

```
E { background-image: radial-gradient(closest-corner circle at 0% 100%, white, black); }
```

#### Using multiple Color-Stop Values

As well as the linear gradient, the radial one can have more than two colors and you can modify the point where the points are, the syntax is the same as in linear gradients.

#### Reapeating Radial Gradients

The same applies to repeating gradients, the syntax is the same as in the linear ones.

### Multiple Gradients

You can add multiple gradients in the same element, yo can use all the things we use in the chapter the only restirction is that you need to calculate the positions where you put each gradient and its with transparent in order to not cover the next gradient

|                              | Chrome | Firefox | Safari |   IE |
| ---------------------------- | ------ | ------- | ------ | ---- |
| linear gradients             |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |
| Reapiting linear gradients   |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |
| Radial gradients             |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |
| Repeating radial gradients   |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |


## [Prev](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter10/Ch10.md)
## [Index](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter11/README.md)
## [Next](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/blob/main/Chapter14/Ch14md)