## Values and sizing 

One of the main points of the new CSS3 is the control, and in this chapter we will see how this is applied to the new units, and methods you use to calculate dimensions.

### Relative Length units

A relative length unit, is a value that is dependant to another property to be defined, in CSS2.1, the first is em, that is calculated from the font-size property, and ex, that is calculated from the x-height of the element's font, CSS3 add some new values.

#### Root-Relative Units

The first new unit implemented is the rem or root em, it behave like em, but instead of using the font-size of the element, uses the font-size of the document root.

```
E { font-size: rem; }
```

#### Viewport-Relative Units

The two properties related to the viewport are vw and vh, vw refers the total width of the viewport and vh refers the total height of the viewport, so this units are percentual, you can also use vmax and vmin that obtains their value of the highest value or the smaller in that order.

### Calculated Values

In CSS3 you can input mathematic calculations, and the browser will do the math for you, the syntax is the next.

```
E { property: calc(opeartion); }
```

Where the property is any property that uses units, and the operation is the math. For this one, there are some rules: you can only use the four basic operations - addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), and division (/) - to indicate an operation. A space is needed between the operator and the numbers, and the operations follow the order of operations, which means multiplication/division are done first before addition/subtraction.

### Sizing Elements

The general options for modifing your element size are setting the width, height, or their max/min variations, you can use absolute values, (px) or percentaje (em), but CSS3 add new properties and values aimed to provide extra flexibility.

#### Box sizing

The W3C box model was diferent for the one used in IE, the W3C makes the box size and the padding and margin are extra to this value, in contraposition, the IE makes the box size the equal to the total width.

Now you can change between them using the property.

```
E { box-sizing: keyword; }
```

Where if you use content-box, you use the W3C description, and if you use border-box, you use the IE version.

#### Intrinsic and Extrinsic Sizing

One problem in web layout is that the elements are ignorant of their content and context, for that reason an element wouldn't react to the size of parent or child elements, but now you have the tools to change that with.

```
E { width: keyword; }
```

##### max/min-content

This keywords are intrinsic values that uses the larger or the smallest item of content.

##### fit-content

This intrinsic value adapt the size of the element to contain the items contained and not leave blank space.

##### fill

This extrinsic value, makes the element fits the width or height of its parents.

|                            | Chrome | Firefox | Safari |   IE |
| -------------------------- | ------ | ------- | ------ | ---- |
| Root-relative units        |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| Viewport-relative units    |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  | IE10 |
| Calculated values          |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| Box sizing                 |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  Yes |
| Intrinsic/extrinsic sizing |   Yes  |    Yes  |   Yes  |  No  |



## [Prev](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/Chapter15/Ch15.md)
## [Index](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/index.md)
## [Next](https://github.com/IIKUYY/CSS/tree/main/Chapter17/Ch17.md)